https://www.abc.net.au/news/rural/2022-05-12/2011-live-export-class-action-costs-could-triple/101058716
Live export ban class action costs could more than triple for federal government
ABC Rural / By Michelle Stanley, Stephanie Sinclair, and Hugo Rikard-Bell
Posted Thu 12 May 2022 at 12:14amThursday 12 May 2022 at 12:14am
A cow stands with her head over a barbed wire fence.
Compensation and interest costs associated with the 2011 live cattle export ban are expected to triple to almost $2 billion.(ABC News: Steve Cavenagh)
Share this article

COPY LINK
SHARE
It has been 11 years since the federal government's snap ban on live cattle exports devastated the northern pastoral industry, and those fighting for compensation remain up to $2 billion out of pocket. 

Key points:
It is expected the total bill for the 2011 government's ban on live cattle exports to Indonesia will be close to $2 billion
Initial estimates had put costs at $600 million
People within the industry say they are frustrated by the slow process, two years after the Federal Court deemed the ban 'unlawful'
A class action against the Commonwealth has submitted its final analysis of the financial impact of the ban, pinning the damage at $1.2 billion, with a further $800 million in interest.

Previous estimates had put the cost at $600 million, which increased to $800 million as claimants rose in 2021. 

Class action facilitator, Tracey Hayes, said the process had been a long and frustrating experience for claimants, who were still paying the price.

"I think about it like rust in their balance sheet; they have existing and compounding levels of debts that shouldn't be there, that is there as a result of this illegal decision by government," she said.

"The important piece for us is to get the compensation out the door and returned to people that were devastated and had their businesses impacted.

"It's been a long decade."

The class action's analysis was submitted to the Department of Finance six weeks ago, and members are awaiting a response.

Only the lead claimant in the class action had been paid — the Brett Cattle Company.

The Department of Finance confirmed it was progressing the claims but was unable to provide further comment. 

Ms Hayes said the upcoming federal election should not cause further delays to the finalisation of the class action. 

Tracey Hayes
Live export class action facilitator, Tracey Hayes, says analysis of the claims has been sitting with the federal department of finance for more than six weeks. (Supplied: Facebook NTCA)
Pastoralists went broke waiting
Gilnockie Station's John Armstrong said the Federal Court ruling was a relief at the time, but the delay in compensation had cost many of his friends in the industry their livelihoods.

"It was just a cataclysmic event for us when it first happened. I know we put off several staff that very next day," Mr Armstrong said.

"But a lot of people also went broke because the compensation usually in terrible events ... is generally fairly quickly derived, but now we're looking at 12 years nearly, and we're still waiting.

"As a result, many of our friends and many people have gone broke in the meantime because they just couldn't bear the financial imposition of it." 

Brown cattle stand in a loading ramp 
It has been almost two years since the Federal Court deemed the 2011 live cattle export ban 'unlawful'.(ABC News: Josh Spong)
In addition to the direct financial impact, Mr Armstrong said the ban also impacted production and property maintenance.

"[It caused] considerably great problems for many of us because we didn't do our maintenance that we should have on our fences, and we didn't buy probably the right bulls that we should have, and we didn't put supplement into the cattle we should have so, therefore, our calving percentages went down.

"You're sort of compounding your costs of recovery by all those factors." 


In Western Australia's Pilbara region, livestock export depot owner Paul Brown expressed his frustration at the length of time compensation was taking. 

He said the lengthy process had been a factor in the decision to sell his business.

"Certainly, for us at the feedlot it's been hard," Mr Brown said.

"We just can't afford to keep waiting in the hope that we can get some money out in the end and invest in the feedlot and continue on."

Mr Brown said ongoing uncertainty had been concerning for the wider industry and impacted further investment. 

"It's very frustrating that we're 11 years since the suspension, two years since the [court] decision, and there seems to be no light at the end of the tunnel in relation to the finalisation of this action so that we can all move on," he said. 

"Money's locked up that we don't have access to, and it means it's very hard to invest in other things when you don't know what you're going to be getting at the end of it. If you're going to get anything at all." 

Man in blue shirt and large hat leaning on cattle yards
Hedland Export Depot owner Paul Brown says the delay in receiving compensation as part of the class action has contributed to the decision to sell his business. (ABC News: Rebecca Parish)
'Hopefully' worth the wait, for those holding on
More than 10 years on from the original decision by then-agriculture minister Joe Ludwig, the increasing compensation payout made the delay "worth the wait" according to John Armstrong.

"I hope [it is worth the wait] for those who could hang on, but many couldn't, and went broke in the meantime," Mr Armstrong said.

"In 2011 we thought we were going to set up a five-year [retirement] plan ... well, we're still trying to formulate a five-year plan. 

"It could've been handled much quicker, and the federal government of the day could've put in place initiatives to handle it better."

Get the latest rural news
Visit ABC Rural for agriculture and mining news, including weather and the markets
Sign up for Rural RoundUp: Stories from rural and regional Australia, in your inbox every Friday, or for Rural news daily.
Posted 12 May 2022