https://www.weeklytimesnow.com.au/agribusiness/livestock-sales/kelly-country/african-swine-fever-uptick-could-be-positive-for-australian-beef-and-lamb-prices/news-story/a81a177aef89a628aba3a7da50190e39
China’s African Swine Fever may see Australian beef, lamb prices rise
KELLY COUNTRY: CHINA’S impact on global protein sales could become more pronounced this year as it battles African Swine Fever.

JENNY KELLY
3 min read
April 24, 2019 - 12:00AM
The Weekly Times
Chinese import demand for beef and sheepmeat is rising.
Chinese import demand for beef and sheepmeat is rising.
CHINA has become the world hub for meat imports, and the country’s impact on global sales for every protein from chicken through to beef and lamb could become more pronounced this year as it battles African Swine Fever.

Last year China officially purchased more than one million tonnes of beef for the first time, overtaking the US to take the mantle as the world’s biggest beef market.

Sales of mutton and lamb have also shown significant gains in the past 12-months, and the growing Chinese appetite and spending on meat is a key reason Australian farmers have been able to receive decent money for livestock during the current drought.

The official growth for China, based on sales processed through Chinese Customs, is staggering when viewed over time. As the graph on this page shows, China has gone from purchasing just 700,000 tonnes of meat in 2010 to around three million tonnes today.

It is also worth noting that China has long had a lot of indirect sales of meat that went into the country through backdoor channels such as Hong Kong and Vietnam, something the industry refers to as the grey trade.

The Chinese Government has clamped down on this grey trade, but data and figures out of the country can be patchy, inaccurate and politically controlled. It is one of the issues facing meat traders and market analysts from around the world as they try to grasp the full extent and likely ramifications of the African Swine Fever outbreak sweeping through the Chinese pig industry.

China is the world’s powerhouse for pork production. According to the US Department of Agriculture, China produced more than 55 million tonnes carcass weight of pork last year — 10 times the amount produced in the US.

In world rankings, China is the number one pork producer by a long way. Second is the European Union at around 23 million tonnes, and third is the US at around 12 million tonnes.

So China losing a big chunk of its pig herd and pork supply for its 1.4 billion people could have a big ripple affect across the meat sector.


Australia’s red meat exports to China and South East Asia are growing. 
Australia’s red meat exports to China and South East Asia are growing.
ASF, which does not affect humans, broke out in China last August. It is a virus commonly found in wild warthogs and bush pigs, and can be spread by certain species of ticks, according to the Centre for Food Security and Public Health in the US.

In intensive pig populations it is highly contagious and death rates are high.

In recent days it was revealed ASF had spread to the Chinese island of Hainan, an area the Chinese Government had once hoped it could declare free of the disease.

Numbers around how many pigs have died of the virus in China, and how many have been culled in an attempt to stop its spread, remain very rubbery.

Rabobank believes the outbreak is severe and the full story is yet to emerge.

“ASF has spread to every province in mainland China and is now affecting an estimated 150 to 200 million pigs, and the expected 30 per cent loss in pork production is unprecedented,’’ Rabobank senior animal protein analyst Christine McCracken said.

Pork prices in China have already started to rise.

The South China Morning Post this week warned its readers that government officials now believe pork prices could spike 70 per cent by the end of this year as the pig losses start to mount.

Meat prices will obviously be a major component of how the looming shortage of pork in China plays out, as not all Chinese consumers have the wealth to shift to more expensive beef and lamb.

The following list of retail meat prices for last year, as published by China’s Agricultural and Rural Animal Husbandry and Veterinary Bureau, had chicken as the cheapest and beef as the dearest.

The price averages, in Australian dollars, were:

CHICKEN: $4.18/kg

PORK: $4.60/kg

SHEEPMEAT: $13/kg; and

BEEF: $13.60/kg.

Most market watchers believe the shortage of domestic pork in China will most likely be replaced with chicken first, followed by imported pork, and then some carry-over into mutton, lamb and beef. But with the volume of meat China needs, even modest improvements to red meat demand could still have a positive price impact, particularly for lower value cuts such as briskets and shanks.

And the impact of China’s ASF outbreak will ripple out into other markets.

As an example, lean hog futures pricing in the US have surged up to 10 per cent in just a week recently as the American industry reacts to the prospects of bigger and better sales to China, despite tariffs.

It comes after the USDA reported that China has purchased 23,800 tonnes of US pork in the first trading week of March — the biggest weekly order for two years.

Dearer pork prices in the US will shift demand on to other meats, such as beef, and the cycle goes on.

The ASF outbreak in China is one to watch.