https://www.wangarattachronicle.com.au/rural-news/beef-outlook-remains-upbeat
Beef outlook remains upbeat
MAY 09 2022
UPDATED MAY 9, 2022
Shane Douthie


HAPPY TO BE HERE: Relatively recent arrivals to the area, Muki Mulder and son Freddie were all smiles at Friday's store cattle sale, although Freddie was a tad shy. PHOTO: Brodie Everist Id:24366
PRICES remained firm at Friday's monthly store cattle sale at the Wangaratta Livestock Exchange with the outlook also positive with more rain on the way.

Initially forecast to attract around 750 head the final number at the sale was closer to 1000, with only a few vendors present but a good turnout of commission and feedlot buyers.

Nutrien Wangaratta stock agent Daniel Fischer said it was a good sale overall for interest and prices.

"Prices had been dropping compared to a month ago, and even earlier this week at other sales but our sales today (Friday) were probably better," he said.


"Heifers in particular probably averaged $100–$150 dearer and prices ranged from around $5.20 per kilo up to the low $7s.".

Everton producer Paul Hourigan was more than happy with the price he received for his Angus Friesian heifers with 2–3 month old Limousin calves.

"I was hopeful of getting around the $4000 mark (cow and calf) but the top pen made $4200 (cow and calf) and they averaged out at $4025," he said.

"I would be happy with that any day of the week."

Mr Hourigan said conditions were still good although more rain wouldn't hurt.

"It won't hurt to start raining again, although there is some forecast for next (this) week," he said.

"Going back a month ago it was as dry as its been all summer but conditions have been pretty good overall."

Mr Hourigan said the main issue facing local farmers was the high cost of expenses including chemicals and fertilisers, but he was also optimistic about the outlook.

"I'm hoping prices have peaked," he said.

"We're just coming into our chemical season but I was fortunate enough to have stocked up a bit before the real price rise hit.

"I got the heads up from my supplier that prices were about to move."

Wangandary farmer Muki Mulder was at the yards with his son Freddie (2 1/2) for the sale of 10 Angus steers from his Manor Hill Farm property.

"They averaged around $5.80 per kilo, around $2200 per head so I'm pretty happy with that," he said.

"In fact I would have been happy with anything over $2000."

The smile on the Mulders' faces not only came from the good prices but just the fact they were at the sale.

The family, which also includes wife Sarah and daughter Trinity (7), only moved to the property 12 months ago from Melbourne, fulfilling a long held dream.

"It's been a good treechange and basically our first farming set–up," Mr Mulder said.

"We chose Wangaratta for a combination of things; it has everything and all the resources are close to us.

"I used to drive trucks up here doing deliveries to farms so I had a pretty good idea of what was here."