https://www.weeklytimesnow.com.au/agribusiness/dairy/chopper-pressure-to-come-from-us-and-lift-in-aussie-herd-numbers/news-story/74fcc55b9980cb94ec15f2bb19ebd830

Chopper pressure to come from US and lift in Aussie herd numbers
GROWING US beef production and a “pick-up” in Australian herd numbers could place pressure on grinding beef prices later this year, according to an industry analyst.

SIMONE SMITH
less than 2 min read
January 17, 2018 - 12:00AM
The Weekly Times
0 comments
GROWING US beef production and a rise in Australian herd numbers could place pressure on grinding beef prices later this year, according to an industry analyst.

This comes as average prices for dairy cows sold at Victorian prime markets have fallen between 4 and 11 per cent in the past three months, according to Meat and Livestock Australia.

Prices were down 4 per cent in December, averaging 197.5 cents a kilogram.

The first sales this month averaged 181.7c/kg, down 12 per cent on January last year.

Yardings were down in October and November last year compared with the same months in 2016.

The largest decline was November where there were 32 per cent less light-weight cows penned, 29 per cent less medium weights and 3 per cent less heavy weights, according to MLA. Numbers picked up in December with 13 per cent more yarded, followed by a fall of 68 per cent at the first sale of the new year. Rabobank animal protein analyst Angus Gidley-Baird said US beef prices provided a lead for the grinding beef market. The US has been growing its herd at 3 to 4 per cent a year and as a result prices last year were expected to be softer. However, Mr Gidley-Baird said a rise in US beef consumption and exports did not affect prices as expected. He said this combination of factors could influence Australian grinding beef prices later this year though, especially if local producers start to off-load older cattle as replacements finally begin hitting the market.

Mercardo livestock market analyst Matt Dalgleish predicted the local chopper market would decline about 10 per cent this coming year, reflecting growing slaughter and production numbers as the Australian herd rebuilt. He said underlying global demand growth would prevent prices from crashing as more supply came on to the market.

Mr Dalgleish said the prices would reflect a “slow and steady decline”. Mulcahy Nelson director Sam Nelson on Monday said there had only been one sale in Shepparton this month and cows made up half of the 700 export cattle offered.