https://www.countrynews.com.au/news/euroa-weaners-cattle-price-still-running-strong/
PREMIUM
NEWS
Euroa weaners: Cattle price still running strong
By Daneka Hill
Jan 14, 2022

Sale on: A chock-a-block pen of young weaners at the sale. Angus were the dominate breed with Simmental and Herefords far behind. Photo by Daneka Hill
The Euroa saleyards have proved what we all know — the cattle job is red hot.

Just under 2000 head were yarded for the Euroa Annual Blue Ribbon Weaner sale where top price was achieved by Ruffy Angus stud Coonamara with a 20-head lot of 412kg steers selling for $2500 each (606c a kg).

The dispersing Gunbar Development received the best value per kilo with a 43-head lot of 171kg steers selling for $1880 (1095c a kg).

Nutrien Harcourts livestock agent Brad Gleeson said the prices did as expected.

“The heifers were pretty much the stars of the shore. The top end were bought to go back into breeding programs locally and NSW,” Mr Gleeson said.

“This was a store sale so everyone was going into the back paddocks or feedlots.”

The big buyers were Elders Gunnedah, which took around 200 weaners while commission buyer Duncan Brown snapped up a whopping 600.


All smiles: Hamish, 14, and Travis Sullivan from Whistler Ridge Meats with their pen of autumn calves. Photo by Daneka Hill
Kilmore Angus farmers Travis and Tamie Sullivan said they sold a pen of 320kg steers for 678 cents a kilo.

“This is our first time here at Euroa and we’re very happy with the prices,” Mr Sullivan said.

“We’ve never had autumn calves to sell before and our agent said this was the place to be.”

Euroa beef farmer Scott Walters sold two pens of eight month old steers for $2200 and $2400 respectively.

“We were very much hoping to see those prices,” Mr Walters said.

“The steers are all grass-fed and I’ve got big hopes for the lot of heifers I have coming up.”


In attendance: Tom Woods and Scott Walters. Photo by Daneka Hill
Retired agent Tom Wood was also keeping an eye on the to-and-fro.

“This prices are about level with what everything else is doing,” Mr Wood said.

“The price is firm everywhere. You only hope it stays that way for awhile so the buyers can get their money back. Either way, it’s better than money in the bank because it makes nothing in the bank.”


Full house: The sale started at 10.30am and was well attended. Photo by Daneka Hill
Someone who’s taken that advice to heart is retiree Peter Porter who raises weaners for “holiday money”.

“I retired in 1999 but got sick of it pretty quick and moved to Longwood,” Mr Porter said.

“I’m here looking at the really young lots. The prices are very good at the moment — not the best to buy at.”

Mr Porter was confident the prices would stick through 2022, giving him time to resell any stock he buys at a premium.

By Daneka Hill
Journalist
