https://www.commercialrealestate.com.au/news/local-farmers-snap-up-23m-of-cattle-properties-at-auction-1136726/
Local farmers snap up $23m of cattle properties at auction
australian-financial-review
LARRY SCHLESINGER
|
MAY 08, 2022

Cashed-up farmers looking to expand their holding and take advantage of record beef prices are keeping the value of grazing farmland on the East Coast buoyant after bidding against each other for over $23 million of breeding properties in Central Queensland and Central Western NSW over April.

In the Monto district west of Bundaberg, Lorray, a 2382ha freehold property featuring five kilometres of Burnett River frontage sold for $5.36 million following bidding from all three registered bidders.

Charlie McCarron, from Ray White Rockhampton, who handled the sales campaign alongside Bruce Douglas of Ray White Rural, said it was an established trend that local farmers were driving the market while corporate buyers had “taken a step back”.

Mr McCarron attributed the strong result to “high cattle prices”. He said all the registered bidders were local farming families. The vendor was Webster Pastoral Holdings headed by veterinarian Hayley Webster.

Closer to Brisbane, Mount Moon, an 815ha cattle property at Moogerah in the Scenic Rim region capable of running a 500-strong breeding herd, sold for $7.65 million under the hammer after bidding opened at $4 million.

The campaign handled by Ray White Rural’s Jez McNamara generated seven registered bidders after 35 groups inspected the property from as far afield as Victoria, the Northern Territory and Western Australia. On the day, five bidders competed for Mount Moon.

Ms McNamara said the price achieved for Mount Moon was beyond the owner Colin Goldsworthy’s expectation. Mr Goldsworthy breeds Angus cattle at Mount Moon.

The buyers were Brisbane-based families, Ms McNamara said.

Also selling in April – via online auction and well above the reserve price – was Tarcoola, a 1444ha freehold cattle property at Moonie in Queensland’s Western Downs.

It achieved $6.2 million under the hammer following a sales campaign steered by Mitch Gillece of Nutrien Harcourts GDL. Mr Gillece said four of the nine registered bidders were active at the auction. It sold to a buyer from Central Queensland.

Moving out of Queensland, Everton, a 1419ha cattle breeding property on Lachlan Valley Way in Condobolin in Central Western NSW sold for $4.3 million after three of the six registered bidders competed for it.

Selling agents Oscar Freeman and Paddy Ward from Ray White Parkes said the buyers were a local farming family looking for a cattle breeding property.

“It was a strong marketing campaign that generated interest from more than 10 parties,” Mr Freeman said.

“We had interest from Orange and Nowra alongside local operators.”

“The attraction of Everton was the [Lachlan] River frontage, irrigation potential and excellent cattle breeding country,” Mr Freeman said.

These auction sales follow median farmland prices rising 20 per cent last year to just under $7100 per hectare, according to Rural Bank’s annual farmland survey.

This financial year, national farmgate production is expected to hit a record $81 billion.

This combination of rising farmland values and bumper revenue has put many farmers in a strong position to expand their holdings.

Ray White chief economist Nerida Conisbee predicted further increases in farm prices, despite interest rates starting to rise.

“One buyer group which has been missing over the past two years may return,” Ms Conisbee said.

“International investors are keen on Australian farms and have been relatively quiet since the start of the pandemic. Open borders have the potential to bring them back, and combined with continued strong agricultural conditions, are likely to lead to a continual increase in farm prices,” she said.