https://www.abc.net.au/news/rural/2022-04-22/australian-agriculture-boom-investment-opportunities-asx/100997132
Australian agriculture offering investment opportunities for everyday people off-farm
By National Regional Reporter Eliza Borrello
Posted Thu 21 Apr 2022 at 9:24pmThursday 21 Apr 2022 at 9:24pm
A woman's cupped hands, full of fertiliser.
Fertiliser is a precious commodity on Australian farms amid a global shortage.(ABC News: Eliza Borrello)
Help keep family & friends informed by sharing this article

COPY LINK
SHARE
Australian agriculture is booming, but before examining how people are investing in it — without actually buying a cow — let's take a quick look at why it is doing so well. 

Key points:
The outlook for Australian agriculture is strong following a record-breaking grain crop and high cattle prices
Agriculture has been suggested as a conservative, long-term investment for everyday people wanting to capitalise
Investment risks include weather events and rising input costs such as fertiliser and diesel
This summer, Australian grain farmers harvested a record-breaking crop, totalling an estimated 61.9 million tonnes.

Then Russia invaded Ukraine, one of the world's biggest grain producers, and already-strong prices soared even higher.

Canola being exported from Kwinana in Western Australia is fetching more than $1,200 a tonne — up a whopping 72 per cent on the price one year ago.

Cattle prices are off the charts too.

Light steers exported live from Darwin to Indonesia are worth $5.50 kilogram, up 112 per cent year on year.

Bright yellow canola fields stick out in the rural landscape.
The value of Australian canola per hectare is increasing to record levels.(Instagram: @my_vision_photography)
Agricultural land prices are also continuing to march north.

According to Core Logic data analysed by Elders, the median price per hectare of Australian farmland increased by 18.4 per cent in 2021 to a record $7,060 per hectare. 

Let's now look at how everyday investors — those without a farm, truck, and tractors — can get in on the boom. 

It comes with a big caveat, however, as this article contains general information only.

You should consider obtaining independent professional advice in relation to your particular circumstances.

Fitzroy crossing bull sale crowd
Saleyards around Australia are doing a roaring trade.(Supplied: Courtney Fowler)
Buying bundled stocks
According to Evan Lucas, chief market strategist at InvestSMART, one of the easiest ways everyday investors can invest in agriculture is through buying ag-focused Exchange Traded Fund (ETF) units on the Australian Stock Exchange (ASX).

A close up of a man's face.
Evan Lucas from InvestSMART says some ETFs focus broadly on agriculture. (Supplied: Evan Lucas)
ETFs essentially bundle several stocks with a particular theme.

Mr Lucas said it may be hard to find a cattle- or wheat-specific ETF but there were some that broadly focused on agriculture.

Matt Dalgleish, commodity markets insight manager at Thomas Elder Markets, said investing in agriculture-focused ETFs was a cheaper way to dip your toe in the sector than buying a farm.

"[They can] be relatively small nominal investments, into the thousands or tens of thousands, rather than the millions of dollars you need to get into most farming operations," he said.

Real estate investment trusts
Mr Lucas suggested real estate investment trusts (REITs) were also worth considering because some of them "actually pack up a lot of agricultural land" along with "agricultural providers".

"They also tend to be looking at being the landlords of things like processing plants," he said.

Dairy cows in the milking shed
Real estate investment trusts can involve farms and processing facilities.(ABC Rural: Laurissa Smith)
"A lot of the dairy processing plants are held in REITs that are then leased out to your Fonterras or whoever it might be.

"It is certainly a space that we're seeing a lot of interest [in] because at the moment soft commodities are exploding."

Agriculture-focused stocks 
Investing directly in agricultural companies listed on the ASX is, of course, another option and one Mr Lucas believes is worth looking at given the current strength of Australia's farm sector.

"You look at something like GrainCorp: it's exploding because of what's been going on in the last couple of weeks," he said.

Mr Dalgleish added it was also worth looking at companies that provided key farm inputs like fertiliser, which is in short supply right now.

looking down on a harvester and bin chaser working in the field  
The war in Ukraine has seen Australian grain fetch higher prices.(Instagram: @elliemorrisau)
The risks involved
Fires, floods and droughts are some of the most obvious risks the agriculture sector faces.

But Mr Lucas said input shortages and price rises, like those seen recently with fertiliser, diesel and AdBlue (diesel exhaust fluid), should also be considered, along with geopolitics.

"What is going on in Ukraine is horrible but, also from a soft commodity reason, it's why it's moving," he said. 

"About 30 per cent of global grain supplies come out of the Black Sea, so that is clearly being interrupted.

"Sooner or later, that will somewhat come back, or other players will actually soak up that supply and bring the price back down."

Lambs are moved in to yards, surrounded by dust at sunset.
Australian sheep meat is also in high demand.(ABC Open contributor Scott Colvin)
The rewards
Mr Dalgleish describes agriculture as a conservative investment. 

"The agriculture sector doesn't have the super high returns that you might get on average in say, equity, but it also doesn't have the level of risk," he said.

A close up of a middle aged man's face
Matt Dalgleish from Thomas Elder Markets believes Australian agriculture is in a boom phase.(Supplied: Matt Dalgleish)
"Over the long run, the returns that agriculture deliver are generally pretty stable and, from a fund perspective, they're considered a reasonably good way to diversify your risk.

"It also provides you a better return than what you're getting in, say, a bond or a cash investment presently with interest rates so low."

Mr Lucas argues agriculture is also a more stable investment than cryptocurrency, where young investors, in particular, have been lured with the promise of quick returns.

"From my perspective, you should never be looking for a quick return because if you're investing for a quick return, you are more likely to see a possible upside, but you're going to see as much, if not more, downside.

cows in pilbara paddock
Mr Dalgleish believes investing in Australian agriculture is a long-game strategy.(ABC Rural: Michelle Stanley)
The outlook
Mr Dalgleish believes agriculture is in a boom phase and many of its commodities have a good outlook for at least the next decade.

"Particularly things like sheep meat [because of] limited supply and growing demand," he said.

"It [agriculture] might get a bit of a hiccup through the next drought but those global prospects and opportunities are pretty immense."

Mr Lucas said Australians were "very good at agriculture, and therefore that can also be a decent reason to be looking at it".

Get the latest rural news
Visit ABC Rural for agriculture and mining news, including weather and the markets
Sign up for Rural RoundUp: Stories from rural and regional Australia, in your inbox every Friday, or for Rural news daily.
Posted 21 Apr 202221 Apr 2022
Share

