https://www.weeklytimesnow.com.au/agribusiness/cattle/beef-cattle-prices-climb-instantly-with-queensland-rain/news-story/ed7b90de936353bcffbbbb872b0f6982
Beef cattle prices climb instantly with Queensland rain
WIDESPREAD rain across parched areas of northern Australia has breathed new life into the beef market.

JAMIE-LEE OLDFIELD
less than 2 min read
March 14, 2018 - 12:00AM
The Weekly Times
0 comments
WIDESPREAD rain across parched areas of northern Australia has breathed new life into the beef market.

The industry’s benchmark Eastern Young Cattle Indicator rose to 566.75c/kg carcass weight on Monday — an increase of 23.5c/kg, or more than 4 per cent, on last week.

Meat and Livestock Australia said good rainfall in Queensland in recent weeks was expected to both shorten supply and ramp up restocker demand.

According to the Bureau of Meteorology, Atherton — southwest of Cairns — received 364mm of rain in the seven days to 9am on Monday. In the Gulf country, Kamilaroi recorded 262mm, Yappar River, 187mm, Mt Isa, 176mm, and Burketown, 130mm. There have also been good falls in western Queensland.

MLA said the rallying of prices in the past week was mirrored last year, when an early autumn cyclone delivered a boost to the EYCI. This time last year the EYCI was trading 8 per cent higher at 614c/kg. “The rise in prices then was caused by considerable disruptions to cattle supplies, as well as the reinvigorated restocker interest,” MLA said. “However, a dry winter prevailed, which saw cattle slaughter levels remain elevated and prices steadily decline.”

Mercado analyst Matt Dalgleish said rain had resulted in a 41 per cent drop in Queensland cattle yardings in the past fortnight.

National Livestock Reporting Service data showed cattle prices in Queensland rose between 5 and 20 per cent last week, with vealer steers up 60c/kg liveweight, he said.

But NAB said a forecast dry autumn and price premiums on feed grain in the north could take the edge off current rates.

NAB agribusiness economist Phin Ziebell said weather has been a major driver of local grain and livestock prices, which looked set to continue.


“The price bump is good news for cattle producers, and the rain will no doubt aid recently dented pasture growth in Queensland. But follow-up rain is needed to see this continue,” Mr Ziebell said.

Rabobank agreed, pointing to the 10 per cent EYCI fall from the start of the year until the end of February as a sign restocking demand had waned.