https://www.miragenews.com/call-for-grassfed-beef-producers-with-passion-612334/
Call for grassfed beef producers with passion for demonstrating environmental performance

 

 


Producers are invited to get involved in a new project that aims to develop an environmental sustainability tool for all grassfed beef producers wanting to measure and demonstrate their sustainable production practices.

Customers and other industry stakeholders are increasingly looking for evidence of sustainable production across agricultural industries. The new tool will enable producers to take advantage of opportunities presented by markets and supply chains wanting red meat with environmental credentials.

There is currently no industry-wide measurement and monitoring system for producers to demonstrate their environmental performance and achieve recognition on an individual business level. An online environmental sustainability platform will be developed to address this gap.

The platform will cover five theme areas:


 
biodiversity stewardship
ground cover
carbon balance
tree cover
drought resilience.
It will include measuring tools and learning resources to help industry continue to improve across the different theme areas.

Grassfed beef producers and beef industry stakeholders have the opportunity to be involved in the design of a framework for the environmental sustainability platform, with the aim to create something practical, user friendly and relevant for industry.

Beef producers with a passion for the industry and the environment, who want to be part of a project to enable market and community recognition of beef producers as environmental stewards, are encouraged to get involved.

Individuals may nominate for one or more of the theme working groups.

Each theme working group will have a maximum of 10 members and must include producers from cattle producing regions across Australia. Each working group will be required to review resources, provide input and make recommendations on theme development. It is anticipated that each group will meet online up to five times in the next six months.

This project is being conducted by a consortium made up of Meat & Livestock Australia, the University of Queensland and WWF, and is funded by the National Landcare Program Smart Farming Partnerships initiative.

Beef producers wishing to submit an expression of interest should register here