https://www.weeklytimesnow.com.au/agribusiness/cattle/cattle-supplies-hit-almost-30year-lows-putting-pressure-on-beef-prices/news-story/d29cb8313dea3a7402d68ef61acbd46a
Cattle supplies hit almost 30-year lows, putting pressure on beef prices
Lovers of a good steak shouldn’t expect to find bargains anytime soon, with cattle prices growing to record levels as the country’s beef herd shrinks to its smallest in decades.

Paula Thompson
Regional Editor
@paulajothompson
2 min read
July 10, 2020 - 10:00PM
34 comments
Tony O'Connell from O'Connell &amp; Sons Market Meat says beef prices have risen significantly. Picture: Keryn Stevens
Tony O'Connell from O'Connell & Sons Market Meat says beef prices have risen significantly. Picture: Keryn Stevens
Gas price cut another boost for family budgets
Check out these subscriber-only specials, giveaways and prizes
Meat lovers are facing sky-high prices for their favourite cuts of beef.

But the price hike is providing no beef for farmers, who are celebrating record returns for their cattle.

The nation’s leading price indicator for saleyard cattle – the Eastern Young Cattle Indicator – has hit a record high of $7.72/kg. A year ago, it was just $5.10/kg.

“(Beef) prices have gone through the roof,” said Tony O’Connell, owner of O'Connell & Son Market Meat in the Adelaide Central Market. “But the quality of the meat we’re getting is extremely good.”

One of the major drivers behind the record price is tight supply, with Australia having its smallest national cattle herd since 1992.

Trevor Hill, from Bruce’s Meat in Mitcham Square Shopping Centre, said it was a major issue for the industry.

“A few meatworks have cut shifts right back so wholesalers around the nation have less meat to bid on,” he said.

Mr Hill said beef cuts had risen 20 to 35 per cent in recent months.

It had pushed the retail price of top-quality beef mince to $18/kg.


Mr O’Connell agreed, adding: “Unfortunately the cattle numbers just aren’t out there.”

He said budget-conscious consumers were making cheaper cuts of meat return to vogue. “At the moment you can buy brisket for $15/kg, while porterhouse is $30/kg, so it’s half the price,” Mr O’Connell said.

He said cheaper meats were an option. With wild deer numbers high, local shooters were providing a good supply of venison, which was retailing for as little as $10/kg for shoulders and legs.

Tight supply and ongoing strong demand should result in a profitable year for cattle producers with stock to sell.

Scott Endersby, whose family runs the Meat at the Mount butcher shop in Mount Compass, as well as the local saleyards on the Fleurieu Peninsula, said the prices farmers were receiving for their cattle at the selling centre were very buoyant.

“Prices are excellent (for farmers), they’ve never been stronger,” he said.

“Prices really got going in April, and in May they became really dear.”

Mr Endersby expects this trend to continue for the foreseeable future.

Scott Endersby from ProStock Livestock with some of his cattle at Willunga. Picture Matt Turner.
Scott Endersby from ProStock Livestock with some of his cattle at Willunga. Picture Matt Turner.
MORE NEWS

Who owns SA’s farms?

Kerrin McEvoy statue gets a leg up

Winemaker in legal battle over luxury lodge

But, he says one aspect that could put a lid on prices would be Australia’s major beef competitors – the US and Brazil – coming back hard on the export market if their coronavirus crises come under control.

Mr Endersby said consumer demand for meat remained high.

“Our sales reached record levels when the COVID lockdowns hit, they were up about 300 per cent,” he said.

“While it’s slowed down somewhat, our revenue would still be up about 60 per cent..”

Originally published as Cattle supplies hit almost 30-year lows, putting pressure on beef prices