https://www.countrynews.com.au/news/cattle-prices-stay-high-at-euroa/

PREMIUM
NEWS
Cattle prices stay high at Euroa
By Daneka Hill
May 6, 2022

Bucks for beef: Colleen Monteleone from Pyalong sold a pen of Angus x Charolais steers for $2200. Photo by Dipak Singh Atwal
The high cattle prices are still hanging around, leaving many farmers at the Euroa saleyards wondering when the bubble will burst.

The Euroa Special Cattle Sale on May 4 averaged $1935 across 1570 head of cattle — leading to a net sale of $3,039,390.

The top price was a $4600 bull bought by Elders Yea from Lachlan King.

Nutrien Ag Euroa branch manager Russell Mawson said the prices were healthy considering May was usually a slower period.

“The big numbers are still coming out of the woodwork and it’s like that because there is money to be made,” Mr Mawson said.

“It’s grass-driven and a reflection of there being grass from Victoria to Queensland.”


‘Prices are getting ridiculous’: Euroa farmer Joe with Joseph, 5, and Antoinette Montalto at the Euroa saleyards. Photo by Daneka Hill
Euroa farmer Joe Montalto said he was starting to feel sorry for grocery shoppers after he sold a pen of 14-month-old Angus steers for $2460.

“I’m very happy but these prices are getting ridiculous. It’s getting out of hand,” Mr Montalto said.

“I bought the mothers of these steers for $550 at these same Euroa saleyards three years ago.”

Colleen Monteleone from Pyalong sold a pen of Angus x Charolais steers for $2200.

“There were little ones mixed in and they sold them all at $2200,” she said.

“Apparently the steers we sold here last year, the guy who bought them made triple the price once he’d grown them out.”

Euroa farmer John King was at the saleyards to ‘price watch’.

“I’m just having a look and comparing prices,” Mr King said.

“I buy from here to fatten them up, then sell at the Shepparton yards. We’ve been having one the best seasons we’ve ever had and I’m looking for anything well bred.”

One of the biggest vendors at the sale was Kelly Angus, which contributed 300 nine- to 10-month-old Angus steers.

By Daneka Hill
Journalist
