https://www.abc.net.au/news/rural/2022-04-28/first-live-export-ship-vietnam-darwin-2022/101018370
Live export cattle trade to Vietnam expected to be slow this year
ABC Rural / By Daniel Fitzgerald
Posted Thu 28 Apr 2022 at 2:34amThursday 28 Apr 2022 at 2:34am, updated Thu 28 Apr 2022 at 2:36amThursday 28 Apr 2022 at 2:36am
Cattle in crates and loaded onto a ship
Just 5,500 head of cattle have been sent to Vietnam so far this year — down from 45,000 over the same period last year.(ABC News: Carl Curtain)
Help keep family & friends informed by sharing this article

COPY LINK
SHARE
The first shipment of live cattle from Darwin to Vietnam left East Arm this week in what is expected to be another slow year for trade to the South-East Asian country. 

Key points:
Live exports to Vietnam are expected to be significantly down on previous years
There has been an oversupply of cattle in Vietnam from Laos and Cambodia after China closed its borders
A new price indicator has been launched for the live export trade
The number of cattle exported from Australia to Vietnam almost halved in 2021 to 160,000 — down from almost 300,000 in 2020. 

This year is expected to be much the same, if not smaller, according to live exporters and industry experts.

Just 5,500 head of cattle have left Australian ports for Vietnam since January, down from around 45,000 head in the same period in 2021.

Frontier International's Tony Gooden said demand for cattle from Vietnam had been "stagnant" for some time, largely driven by COVID lockdowns in the country last year.

"At the time that came about, there was quite a big inventory of Australian cattle in Vietnam [that had been imported through June to September] and, on top of that, there was also the ship that came from Brazil," he said. 

a livestock truck trailer parked next to a live export ship.
The first live export ship from Darwin to Vietnam for 2022 left East Arm this week.(ABC Rural: Daniel Fitzgerald)
"And [there was also] a lot of cattle from Laos and Cambodia, which would normally go through to China but, due to COVID, China locked down that grey trade very quickly. 

"Consequently there was an oversupply of not only Australian cattle and some Brazilian cattle, but a lot of South-East Asian cattle trapped in Vietnam."

Continued high cattle prices in Australia would affect the number of cattle Vietnamese importers would be able to buy this year, Mr Gooden said. 

"My feeling is that there will be some shipments to Vietnam but the volumes will be very low compared to the past two or three years," he said. 

"I don't feel there will be regular shipments every month going to Vietnam this year."

Mr Gooden said it was likely there would be more Brazilian cattle sent to Vietnam this year.

"It wouldn't surprise me if there were another two or three shipments this year," he said.

"That will mean fewer cattle from Australia because they only need so many cattle in Vietnam."

Live export price indicator launched
The first price indicator for the live export trade was launched by Meat and Livestock Australia this week.

The Live Export Price Indicator (LEPI) will track the average sale price of male feeder cattle purchased by exporters for shipment from Darwin to Indonesia.

a screenshot of the live export price indicator graph
The Live Export Price Indicator (LEPI) will track the average price of male feeder cattle exported from Darwin to Indonesia.(Supplied: Meat and Livestock Australia)
It will be updated every Tuesday, covering the relevant cattle exported over the previous fortnight.

This week, the LEPI was $4.98 per kilogram with 5,170 head of male feeder cattle exported to Indonesia from Darwin over the reporting period.

NT Livestock Exporters Association chief executive Tom Dawkins said there had been a lot of input from the industry into developing the indicator over the past 12 months.

"Everyone in the supply chain, from the station gate through to our customers in Indonesia, supports timely and reliable market price reporting," Mr Dawkins said.

"Accurate market reporting is very much in the exporters' interest, given they are actively buying and selling cattle on a daily basis and maintain relationships with producers here in Australia and importers in Indonesia."

Get the latest rural news
Visit ABC Rural for agriculture and mining news, including weather and the markets
Sign up for Rural RoundUp: Stories from rural and regional Australia, in your inbox every Friday, or for Rural news daily.
Posted 28 Apr 202228 Apr 2022, updated 28 Apr 2022