https://www.countrynews.com.au/news/ga-to-market-record-breaking-bull/
PREMIUM
NEWS
GA to market record-breaking bull
By Country News
Aug 2, 2021

Macka’s Australian Black Angus Beef will work with Genetics Australia to market Texas Iceman after the bull smashed Australian record prices on Thursday, July 29.

Texas Iceman R725 (AI) (ET) sold to Macka’s Angus for a record-breaking $225,000 at the Texas Angus bull sale near Warialda in northern NSW, easily eclipsing the previous top of $160,000 paid for an Angus bull.

It is believed to be a record price paid for any bull in Australia.

Despite the high price, new owner Macka’s Angus managing director Robert Mackenzie described him as “a value-for-money bull” that would benefit his operation and the Angus breed around Australia.

Genetics Australia beef manager Nigel Semmens predicts huge demand for product from the bull, with semen expected to be available towards the end of August.

“There’s already high demand for his semen and that will only increase after today’s sale,” Mr Semmens said.

“We will start collecting semen straight away for Genetics Australia to sell and for the large-scale AI programs in Macka’s Angus beef program.

“As an individual bull, he’s a standout young sire.

“His genetic package is unique. He’s sired by American bull Poss Maverick whose genetics are very hard to source in Australia, and he’s also out of one of the top breeding cows in the Texas Angus breeding program, Texas Undine H647.

“Her breeding is highly sought after and she is now deceased so genetics out of her will be very limited.”

This bull’s maternal brother was the top-selling bull in the 2020 Texas Angus sale, selling for $108,000.

Mr Semmens said Genetics Australia and Macka’s Australian Black Angus Beef were a good match.

“We have a great synergy,” he said.

“Macka’s Australian Angus is a fully-integrated commercial operation and we both place a lot of emphasis on animal welfare and are very committed to sustainability and producing a high-quality product.”

Mr Mackenzie said Iceman’s dam had a proven track record of producing excellent progeny and his sire has had a remarkable influence in the United States.

“Iceman gives us something we’re looking for to put some serious power into our 3500-commercial herd operation,” he said.

Macka’s will AI 1000 breeders with him this year and will use him in a new stud operation managed by Robert’s son Jack Mackenzie.

Mr Mackenzie said he decided to go with Genetics Australia because they were the first company that he had discussed the bull with.

“We had a discussion with Nigel and found him to be very open and full of information and we work well together.”

He expects strong demand for Iceman’s semen.

“It was proven today. There were multiple bidders so there’s definitely going to be strong demand for this bull’s semen.

“We’re proud we’ve been able to secure such a unique bull for our operation and to be widely used here in Australia and around the world.

“We’re all about strengthening the genetics of Angus cattle around Australia and it’s great that we can help people get some great genetics.”

Mr Mackenzie said he would have bid even more than $225,000.

“We would have gone well and truly above that price because he was a bull that fitted our operation and our future,” he said.

“For us, he was a cheap investment into our operation and a great investment for all of Australia to be able to share the genetics.

“My 83-year-old father Bruce said ‘we’re not going to leave here without that bull, no matter what'.”

Mr Mackenzie said the sale reflected confidence in the industry and the Angus breed and the future of his business.

“We have an operation from paddock to plate and our customers are looking for the best product; this bull gives us an even better opportunity to deliver better quality to consumers.

“We will also be using his genetics to sell PTIC heifers into the marketplace to give other people the opportunity to have great genetics.”

Mr Semmens said Genetics Australia anticipated semen to be available late August or early September.

“With anticipated high demand, we encourage customers to contact us to register their interest in his semen for the spring breeding season,” he said.

“Moving into 2022, Iceman will have a heavy workload to meet domestic demand and to produce export semen and he will be a sire that will have male and female sexed semen available.”

By Country News
