https://www.weeklytimesnow.com.au/agribusiness/cattle/global-beef-prices-expected-to-fall/news-story/b6a47ea6ae59026b9712b2a0e45801f5
Global beef prices expected to fall
GLOBAL beef prices are expected to slowly fall during the next six years.

NICOLA BELL
2 min read
February 28, 2019 - 12:00AM
The Weekly Times
0 comments
.
GLOBAL beef prices are expected to slowly fall during the next six years.

That’s according to the latest Agri benchmark report released by Meat and Livestock Australia recently.

Agri benchmark is a global not-for-profit network that analyses production systems. It has more than 30 member countries, covering 75 per cent of the world’s beef production.

The report, which looked at how global and Australian beef producers are performing, said the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development-Food and Agriculture Organisation was predicting a “slow fall in nominal prices over the next six years as the US supply initially grows and is followed by Brazil, Argentina and Australia”.

However, because of the way the data is collected and how long it takes, it hasn’t taken into account drought or African Swine Fever outbreaks.

MLA’s market intelligence manager Scott Tolmie said the outcome might change.

“Prices have been at recent highs, so they could go back up and the outlook is still quite good in the high-quality segments Australia supplies,” Mr Tolmie said.

“We (Australia) only accounts for 3 per cent of global beef production, so we operate in different segments to the big producers on a global scale.”

The report showed Australian cattle prices were relatively high in 2017 — the year the data was from — above those in North America, New Zealand and most of Europe.


Australian beef cattle production systems had a low total cost of production in cow-calf systems, compared with similar cow-calf systems in South America, as well as moderate to low weaning rates and moderate to low productivity per cow, especially in northern systems.

The report said Australian cow-calf enterprises had the most profitable year (in 2017) since 2006.

It said all Australian systems achieved short and medium-term profits, and all but two systems achieved long-term profitability.

“Increased revenues were largely driven by a rise in weaner and cull cow prices,” the report said.

“Overall, in 2017 Australia experienced moderate costs of production, but achieved higher overall profitability due to the higher returns and beef prices, which is the opposite to trends in the majority of major beef producing countries,” the report said. Cattle finishing operations in Australia experienced moderate costs of production when compared with all finishing systems, but above average when compared to other grazing based systems.”

The report showed Australian beef-finishing systems received above-average prices compared globally.