https://www.weeklytimesnow.com.au/agribusiness/livestock/how-long-can-australias-beef-prices-stay-so-high/news-story/a34bc4e0cc3327be4eae515a0124f884
How long can Australia’s beef prices stay so high?
Australia’s cattle prices have spent a lengthy period trading above competitor nations. The sustainability of this trend, and potential damage to the supply chain, is now in focus.

JENNY KELLY
3 min read
March 9, 2021 - 2:03PM
The Weekly Times
0 comments
Price check: If Australia’s beef continues to be the dearest in the world, it risks pricing itself out of the market. Picture: Zoe Phillips
Price check: If Australia’s beef continues to be the dearest in the world, it risks pricing itself out of the market. Picture: Zoe Phillips
AS AUSTRALIAN cow prices nudge 600c/kg to be easily the dearest in the world, it again raises the debate of how long the industry can sustain a price run so far above its major competitors.

For more than 12 months, the cost point of commodity beef being shipped out of Australia on to the world stage has tracked well above other countries, as herd rebuilding and the boom season put Australian on a different price trajectory.

The graph highlights how far ahead Australia’s cow beef price is compared to its nearest competitor New Zealand (nearly double) and the US (also nearly double).

If South American countries like Brazil and Uruguay were added the price spread would be off the charts.

Source: MLA database
Source: MLA database
There is obviously a celebratory angle to this, as what producer wouldn’t be happy to see Australian beef prices at the top of the world and delivering record money at saleyards.

Even suggesting that there may be problems associated with such big prices can offend some, who view it as an attack on the value of stock or undermining market confidence.

However, I would defy anyone to look at a graph like this one on cow prices and not be a little concerned with how far ahead Australian values are compared with major competitors.

The issue of how long Australia can extend its record price run is a very real debate that is happening among stock agents, meat buyers and higher up into industry forecasting and analysis.

And it must also be high on in farmers minds, as it is the only way to explain the big volume of stock that has been traded since prices began rising.


Just this week AuctionsPlus senior market analyst Tim McRae put out an opinion piece on the state of the cattle market with the headline of: “Unprecedented, unsustainable and unbalanced.’’

Sums it up really if you look at the bigger picture rather than just paddock feed and the desire for restockers to get more animals around them.

The price discrepancy between Australia and other nations is also being talked about by overseas commentators.

The latest analysis by the Steiner Group out of the US also had graphs showing the different price points between countries.

Steiner used steers as a comparison, and published it converted to American dollars on a liveweight basis.

They came up with:

AUSTRALIAN export weight steers at the equivalent of US302c/kg lwt;

US choice fed steer at US245c/kg lwt;

BRAZIL saleyard steer price at US172c/kg lwt; and

ARGENTINA steers at US139c/kg lwt.

In its latest look at manufacturing beef, Steiner said how Australian exporters were finding it difficult to do deals due to the price they needed to capture against competitors.

They said there was a shift to New Zealand cow beef in recent trading at softer prices.

“Imported beef prices (into the US) last week were steady to modestly lower, largely on New Zealand product. Offerings from Australia remain limited and packers (exporters) there continue to ask above current quotes.’’

The latest available figures for January show the impact of Australia’s record cow prices (and also lower kills and production).

Beef exports to the USA from Australia slumped by 47 per cent in January, with the gap in supply filled by cheaper product from New Zealand and Brazil, according to industry data.

It is not all bad news on the global scene.

There are signs China is ramping up its purchase of protein, taking in more beef amid reports its pig population continues to be harshly hit by new strains of African Swine Flu.

There are also reports of less South American beef in some export markets.

And to apply commonsense, Australia needs global beef prices to improve if it has any chance of supporting current cattle prices in the long term.

The other scenario is Australian prices easing to come back closer to ruling global rates.

Now predicting what is going to happen or when is purely a guessing game.

There are a few timid market forecasters out there at present after many suggested Australia’s cattle prices would start to ease this year, and instead the market went on another run and reach new record levels in February.

While little sympathy is ever expressed for meat processors and exporters, they are certainly feeling the pressure now just like farmers did in the peak of the drought.

Mr McRae said the danger of the current high priced environment was the damage it could do to the supply chain.

“During drought periods, the growers take the burden of the negative (financial outcomes), while processors and exporters accept the positive. In contrast, like today, the growers are positive, while the negatives being made by the processing and exporting links of the supply chain are substantial and growing, and at risk of overusing a word, unsustainable,’’ Mr McRae wrote in his opinion piece.

“Not one sector of the supply chain can carry the negative financial burden of an industry for too long, without the industry becoming structurally weaker over the long term as a result.’’