https://www.countrynews.com.au/news/low-supply-forces-cattle-prices-high/
PREMIUM
NEWS
Low supply forces cattle prices high
By Geoff Adams
Jul 21, 2021

A shortage of cattle and strong demand has pushed prices to near record levels at Shepparton Regional Saleyards.

A pen of four Murray Grey cattle from Tongala brought the top price in their category of $3.85/kg. The price was an equivalent of about $3100 a head.

They were snapped up instantly by the buyer and are destined for a Warrnambool abattoir.

Mick Mulcahy from Mulcahy and Nelson Livestock, said the prime cows were well finished and presented.

“The cow market is as strong as it has ever been. It's been up about 20 to 25c/kg across all grades of cows, today,” he said on Tuesday.

The numbers yarded at Shepparton have been declining in recent weeks, with about 900 in the shed on July 20; down by 200 on the previous week.

Dairy cows were making $3.20 to $3.46/kg.

Saleyards manager Brendan Carey said the numbers offered had fallen in recent weeks while strong demand had continued.

Agent Jayden Ferrari from Northern Victorian Livestock agreed that the prices were among the highest in memory.

“It's been a long time coming after years of drought and other issues. Producers are finally seeing some rewards for hanging on.”

Asked if the prices were likely to remain high, Mr Ferrari said he didn't think the numbers were sufficient to bring the figures down.

“It's just the price due to the cattle numbers dropping off.”

Meat and Livestock Australia reported not all export buyers were present at Shepparton, but this failed to halt the soaring prices.

Beef cows jumped by a further 12c to 28c, while dairy cows were 20c to 24c/kg dearer. Grown steers were in tight supply and fewer heavy-finished steers were about this sale as prices lifted by a further 9c to 13c/kg.

Grown heifers took a big lift as buyers looked to make up the shortfall of heavy steers with heavy heifers.

On July 15 at Swan Hill only 278 cattle were penned, the smallest yarding for some months.

The limited supply put pressure on buyers trying to fill orders and there were some lengthy bidding tussles at times.

Meat and Livestock Australia reported in the week to July 15 the Eastern Young Cattle Indicator hit 975¢/kg as more vealer cattle were offered.

Seven saleyards averaged more than 1000¢/kg for young cattle on the back of increased vealer throughput. The weather also continues to drive restocker demand, helping push the prices up.

By Geoff Adams
Shepparton News assistant edtior
