https://www.weeklytimesnow.com.au/agribusiness/livestock-sales/rising-beef-prices-is-good-news-for-producers/news-story/70effbe533246b1cb85368fad15aee6c
Rising beef prices is good news for producers
The rise of cattle prices has implications for Australia in the face of the spread of coronavirus and economic turmoil.

JENNY KELLY
3 min read
March 11, 2020 - 12:00AM
The Weekly Times
0 comments
Buoyant prices: Good news for producers, but adding to stress for exporters. Picture: Dannika Bonser
Buoyant prices: Good news for producers, but adding to stress for exporters. Picture: Dannika Bonser
TIMELY autumn rain has done more than just put feed into paddocks, it is also helping protect Australian livestock prices against the global trade and economic mess of coronavirus.

As detailed last week, major red meat competitor New Zealand recorded significant price falls for cattle, lambs and sheep as export channels to China are disrupted.

Added to this list can also be US and South American cattle prices, which also softened against the uncertainty and turmoil of the virus spreading and disrupting major economies around the world.

Looking at the latest industry data coming through, Australia stands as the lone major red meat exporting nation to be recording dearer price trends for livestock.

There is good and bad in this scenario.

Rising financial returns for farmers as they come out of extended drought is obviously a welcome result, but as livestock prices decline in other countries the stress on Australian exporters to be able to sell product competitively intensifies.

In the US late last week, the feeder cattle index on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange dropped by a further 1.3 per cent to be listed at 133.87 points.

The Index is the US beef industry’s benchmark indicator for the price of young cattle being placed into feedlots, and is a measure of market confidence as well as supply.

To give the figure some perspective, in late 2014 the index reached a record high of nearly 250 points.


For the last three years it has mostly traded between 140 and 160 points.

The price of manufacturing or hamburger beef in the US has also continued to decline, as export trading shifts back to the US market due to the problems in China.

A case in point is New Zealand.

The latest data issued by the US Department of Agriculture shows New Zealand shipped in more than 4000 tonnes of beef in the last week of February as it seeks to find markets for meat that, up until the coronavirus outbreak, would have found its way to China at a higher value.

The USDA said it was the highest volume of New Zealand beef that has cleared its ports since mid last year.

Also targeting the US market more aggressively is South American product as countries like Brazil also look for market options outside of China, which had been soaking up huge volumes.

The effect of coronavirus on global meat trading, and in turn tracing back to livestock prices, shouldn’t be understated.

The Steiner Consulting Group said although it had looked like the US would struggle to source its usual quota of imported manufacturing beef this year due to the anticipated shortage of product from Australia as it recovered from drought, this outlook has now completely changed.

Late last week it published an updated forecast for meat imports into the US, adding that the figures were conservative, particularly if coronavirus continued to spread and recovery was drawn out.

“We have made some adjustments to our projections compared to January but we are the first to say that the forecast has significant upside risk,” Steiner reported.

“In other words, we think there is the potential for an even more significant increase in US beef imports despite the expected decline in imports from Australia.”

Steiner Consulting Group, which is the leading meat analyst company in the US, believes this is how supplies from major beef suppliers to the US could now play out.

AUSTRALIA — 210,232 tonnes, 12 per cent less or 28,688 tonnes down on last year’s shipments.

BRAZIL — 55,823 tonnes, an increase of 40 per cent or 15,950 tonnes.

NEW ZEALAND — 142,303 tonnes, up 7.5 per cent or 9928 tonnes.

MEXICO — 230,864 tonnes, up 6.5 per cent or 14,090 tonnes.

Their overall conservative prediction is for the US to be supplied with 1,059,726 tonnes of beef from around the world, which would be 2 per cent more than last year despite the big drop in volume from Australia.

It might not sound significant, but the change is about more than just shipping volumes. Before coronavirus hit, the US was in the unfavourable position of having to compete against China on price to attract meat to its shores.

Now that scenario has changed to exporting countries having to shift sales back to the US, which obviously puts the US in a much better bargaining position.

And as the US is a world leader in determining red meat prices, it potentially takes some of the upside off the table, at least until China gets back in the game big time.

But at the moment, the potential breaking of the drought and the rush to restockers is protecting Australian livestock prices from the turmoil unfolding in other regions.

One set of figures worth considering is this:

The latest saleyard indicators show the average price of yearling steers selling to restockers is 445c/kg liveweight — a spike of nearly 230c/kg on a year ago.

The indicator price for heavy steers, selling to processors, is 338c/kg, or 93c/kg better than 12 months ago.

So the price gains for young cattle to the paddock is much more extreme than any price rise for the finished product.

It is farmer money driving the big price gains the industry is seeing for young cattle, as it always does after a major drought episode.

So maybe it is more correct to say producers are currently insulating themselves from the global meltdown of coronavirus, rather than rain.