https://www.abc.net.au/news/rural/2022-02-11/why-meat-is-costing-more/100814638
Why meat is costing more
Landline / 
By national regional affairs reporter Eliza Borrello
Posted Thu 10 Feb 2022 at 7:18pmThursday 10 Feb 2022 at 7:18pm
Butcher's meat display with expensive cuts, $48.99 per kilogram scotch fillet steak, July 2021
Retail meat prices are up 10 per cent per kilogram compared to this time last year.(ABC News: Bec Whetham)
Help keep family & friends informed by sharing this article

COPY LINK
SHARE
It is not your imagination, meat is costing more right now.

Key points:
The price of cattle has skyrocketed during the pandemic, pushing up meat prices
One of the biggest factors has been the lack of stock on the market after the most recent east coast drought
Herds are now rebuilding, but international demand should keep prices high
According to Meat and Livestock Australia, the meat industry's marketing and research body, retail prices are up 10 per cent per kilogram compared to this time last year.

Josh Liebeck who owns Plantagenet Meats, a butcher shop in Mount Barker four hours south of Perth, said he had to put his prices up even higher despite operating in the heart of Western Australia's cattle country.

"Eighteen months ago we sold [beef sausages] for $10.99 a kilo and currently we're selling them for $15.99 a kilo," he said.

A butcher holds a tray of mince
Butcher Josh Liebeck said supply chain issues were so bad in January he only had a week's worth of meat left.(ABC News: Eliza Borrello)
While the price jump is probably hard to stomach for consumers, beef producers are enjoying their largest windfall in years.

Alida Parke farms at Lake Muir, about 350 kilometres south of Perth, and sold 90 weaner steers in January for an average of $2,200 per animal. 

"This year was a first for me in that I sold my weaners, or some of my weaners, at just eight months old [weighing 395kg-420kg] … which was just amazing," she said. 

"It was because of the year that we have had, of such good rain."

Erica Henderson, the assistant manager at the Mount Barker Regional Saleyards, said she had never seen prices so good.

"I've been here for 12 years and in the last 18 months prices have continually risen. Producers should be making a lot of money this year," she said.


So what's causing the price jump?

The weather
According to Scott Cameron, a strategist for Meat and Livestock Australia, the weather has played a big part in pushing up the price of meat.

"We've seen some fantastic growing conditions and that's off the back of a couple of years drought, or some of the worst drought that we've seen in recent history, which resulted in a liquidation of our herd," he said.

"Over those last couple of years producers have decided to hold on to their cattle to grow their herd and put less animals through to processors, which means that there is a contraction in supply, or pressure on supply, which has an upward impact on prices."

A photo of wagyu cattle eating grass during the day at a farm.
Good rainfall has created excellent growing conditions for cattle.(ABC Rural: James Liveris)
International demand
Mr Cameron said other factors like increasing transport costs and labour shortages had also pushed prices up, but supply and demand were the biggest factors.

"Seventy per cent of Australia's stock or sales is through export markets and we've had really strong demand during COVID in high value markets such as Japan, Korea, the Middle East, and the US," he said.

"High demand in those high value markets puts increased pressure on retail prices here domestically."

Two older farmers looking at cattle in pens at a saleyard
MLA predicts international demand for Australian cattle will continue to be strong in 2022.(ABC News: Mark Bennett)
Keeping them fed​
​​​​​​Farmers need pasture to feed their cattle, meaning many have serious fertiliser bills.

Australia imports a significant amount of fertiliser, so when China started holding back supplies for its domestic market during COVID-19, Australian farmers were left scrambling to get hold of it.

Alida Parke was one of them.

"I locked it in early because I got told that the price was going up," she said.

"I'm so glad that we got it because … it's out of our price range now."

A woman in a pink shirt at a cattle sale
Alida Parke has enjoyed record cattle prices but said the cost of fertiliser was a big concern.(ABC News: Mark Bennett)
To her mind, Australia as a nation should be making more of its own fertiliser to ensure food security.

"Yes, it's going to be an extra cost because of the way income is for employing people [in Australia]," she said.

"But I think that farmers are going to have to put that in the budget if we're going to be able to survive this."

A woman's cupped hands, full of fertiliser.
The price of some fertilisers has almost tripled since this time last year.(ABC News: Eliza Borrello)
Will prices come down any time soon?
According to MLA's Scott Cameron there's little chance of the cattle price bubble bursting this year.

"Prices at the moment are sort of stable at that higher price point," he said.

"But also domestically, as we see the food service sector start to recover this year, which is high value product, we actually see or forecast continued buoyant prices."

It also looks like supermarket meat prices will stay where they are too.

"Consumers are actually paying more for their red meat," Mr Cameron said.

 "[In] the last quarter we've seen an increase in spend on red meat of 3.5 per cent versus last year.

"So there is that indication that consumers are continuing to pay premium prices for red meat."

Watch this story on ABC TV's Landline at 12:30pm on Sunday, or on iview.