https://www.farmersjournal.ie/buoyant-beef-market-sees-prices-boom-691842
Buoyant beef market sees prices boom
Finished cattle prices are up as processing demand demand continues to grow across the UK.

Kieran Mailey
MORE > NORTHERN IRELAND
13 April 2022
Email the writer Save this article to myJournal Share this article

Finished cattle in Northern Ireland have received a price boost as demand grows across the UK.
The beef trade has picked up significantly, with prices for prime cattle smashing through the 430p/kg barrier.

While there are still some cattle being bought at the higher end of the 420p/kg range, deals are being done between 430p/kg and 436p/kg for prime steers and heifers.

At the upper end of the market, farmers have reported deals rising to 440p/kg for butcher-type heifers.

Cull cows are a flying trade, with prices pushing above 370p/kg for R grade animals and more on offer for U grading lots as plants look to keep pace with the marts.

Competition in the live ring is intense and mart managers indicate heavy fleshed cows are typically making 200p/kg, which equates to a factory price of 384p/kg at 52% kill-out. Cows with higher levels of conformation are making upwards of 250p/kg.

Slaughter-fit steers and heifers sold through the live ring are returning 250p to 260p/kg for U grade animals, which converts to a beef price of 439p to 456p/kg.

Britain

In Britain, beef markets are also booming, with sales of manufacturing beef driving processing demand.

Factory prices for U grading heifers are typically 444p/kg to 446p/kg, with reports of 450p/kg being paid to specialist finishers. Steers are making similar money, with plants in England offering the highest premiums.

Prices for fat cows are out-stripping those paid by local factories, with good-quality suckler types commanding 390p/kg and above.

Base quotes

Official base quotes for prime cattle at NI plants are running anywhere from 10p to 40p/kg below what is actually being paid.

While some plants are on a base of 420p/kg, others continue to quote 392p/kg. This is causing growing anger among farmers finishing cattle under Aberdeen Angus schemes as the bonus premium is paid on top of the official quote. Some farmers are opting instead to take cattle to the mart.

Supply

With an additional 13,000 cattle processed through NI factories this year, cattle agents expect supplies to tighten significantly in May as supplies of shed cattle start tailing off.

A similar outlook exists in the Republic of Ireland and should underpin beef markets well into the summer period.