https://www.farmersjournal.ie/home-farm-decisions-to-make-on-first-cut-silage-696903
Never have the working capital requirements of the farm been as high. In many ways, the cattle end is easier to manage than the tillage.

We came through similar inflation in cattle and beef prices in the 1970s as we transitioned to full Common Market (as it was called then) membership. This was distorted by the cattle price collapse of 1974, but the basics are the same: there is no profit until you have replaced.

This year with strong beef prices, we’ve maintained stock numbers, and have decided to go for as much weight gain from grass as possible. The reason is simple: cereal and concentrate prices have increased much more than beef.


We are also looking at higher costs of producing crops for the harvest than ever before, so there is a lot to lose in the event of weather or disease damage. The May weather has been close to ideal but the yellow dwarf virus is clearly visible on the winter barley crop, especially in sheltered areas.

The forced removal of seed dressing Redigo Dieter has probably played a part. Whether the level of infection is enough to affect yield potential I don’t know, but we will closely monitor it during the harvest.

The barley is now completely shot out, while the oilseed rape has pods beginning to form. With a forward price for oilseed rape at around € 770/t at 9%, the effect of the Ukraine war is being felt. So far, the crop looks clean and it should be a long while yet until we desiccate.

The next job will be first-cut silage. The penalty this year for over-mature steamy material will be severe. Poor digestibility will be expensive to correct with extra concentrate. I was surprised to see the grass lodging so early.

I can only surmise that the sudden bursts of growth left it vulnerable to the heavy showers we’ve had. The question now is do we split the first cut and take the lodged crop first or wait for another two to three weeks and take one big cut?

